`char` redesign (#6710)
carbon-language/carbon-lang: proposals/p6710.md

    "character" concept, versus an integer value.
-   Revokes and replaces
    [#1964: Character Literals](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/1964).

## Problem

`char` is an important type due to its common use in C++ code. However, the
related proposal
[#1964: Character Literals](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/1964)
has several issues, including:

-   Lacks a decision for `char` handling; it is not mentioned in proposal #1964.
    -   Similarly, decides there are character literals, but more detail is
        needed for implementation.
-   Type literal naming no longer reflects naming consensus.
    -   `Char8` seems potentially more equivalent to `std::char8_t` instead of
        `char`, and for interop purposes these are slightly different types.
        Similar applies to `Char16` and `Char32`.
    -   As a design direction, we have been lowercasing type literals (such as
        `u8`).
-   Conflicting statements about behavior.
    -   For example, "Rationale" states that `var b: u8 = 'a' + 1` would be
        supported, while "Operations" states that `+` is returning a character

>         literal and returning a character literal (not a `u8`).

Reviewer: I think just a repetition?

```suggestion
        supported, while "Operations" states that `+` is returning a character
        literal (not a `u8`).
```

    -   Carbon's `str` type will use `char` for elements.
    -   For interop, map Carbon's `char` to C++'s `char`.
-   Add a `Core.CharLiteral` type for character literals, similar to
    `Core.IntLiteral`.
-   Provide operators which are consistent with the character concept.

This proposal additionally revokes and replaces proposal #1964, rather than
trying to define which parts we are keeping and which are changing.

## Details

### Add a `char` type literal

`char` is intended to offer a basic construct for Carbon's strings that is both
compatible with UTF-8, and has high fidelity with C++ strings.

In support of that, important notes are:

-   `char` itself will be a
    [type literal](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/docs/design/lexical_conventions/words.md#type-literals).
-   `char` notionally represents a UTF-8 code unit.
    -   It can contain invalid code units, as long as it remains 8 bits. We do
        not assume runtime validation.
-   `char` will be backed by `Core.Char`, in the prelude.
    -   `Core.Char` will adapt `u8`.
-   C++ interoperability will transparently map `char` and `Cpp.char` on API
    boundaries.

>     -   C++ `char` is unsigned by default; if a program opts into signed C++

Reviewer: Do we want to say something like "Carbon's C++ dialect" or similar to indicate that this is a choice Carbon is making to default to `-funsigned-char` which is distinct from (most) platform defaults today?

(To be clear, I agree with the direction, just wondering how we want to articulate it.)

Author: How about:

```
    -   When used with Carbon, C++ `char` will be unsigned by default
        (`-funsigned-char`). A program can switch back to signed
        (`-fno-unsigned-char`), and Carbon will maintain interoperability but
        bits will be interpreted differently in each language.
```

(I'm hesitant to just say "dialect" out of concern people will assume it's a really non-standard C++)

Reviewer: Yeah, that's even better, thanks!

[ANSI escapes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ANSI_escape_code). Carbon
[drops support for some escape sequences](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/docs/design/lexical_conventions/string_literals.md#escape-sequences),
such as `\a`, and specifically advises `\x` as an alternative for developers
that need it. Requiring `\a` -> `\x07` -> `\u{07}` is incrementally more verbose
syntax, and developers may be confused why `"\x1B"` is allowed for strings but
`'\u{1B}'` is required for characters.

Values over 7F are ambiguous between an arbitrary byte value and a Unicode code
point, and so should be invalid. However, where both interpretations are
identical for UTF-8 (values up to and including 7F), we will allow `\x` escape
sequences.

### Allow grapheme clusters in character literals

This proposal carries forward the decision in #1964
[to not support grapheme clusters](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/1964/files#diff-192d5568d8c1d15e68abe0c46cc52cc0b375a372d1dad8d2154d09f8b29666c5R340)
in character literals.

### Reuse string literal syntax for character literals

Instead of using single quotes (for example, `'a'`), we could use string literal

> syntax with a conversion (for example, `"a" as char`) for character literals.

Reviewer 2: You could think of this a different way: `"x"` denotes a **text literal**, not a _string_ per se, and text literals will usually be converted to `char` or `str` depending on the surrounding context, with `str` being the default.

(This comment doesn't need to be actioned; it's just food for thought.)

Author: Sure, I've added a subsection detailing that approach. Other than avoiding an explicit cast, were there other upsides you see?

Note I've tried to document downsides, I think due to the ambiguity that the explicit cast is better as a baseline.

This was proposed because it would free up the single quote for other,
unspecified syntax uses.

We have several reasons we want character literals in Carbon:

-   **Common in C++:** Looking at Sourcegraph's search, we see
    [46.2 million](https://sourcegraph.com/search?q=context:global+lang:c%2B%2B+count:50000000+/%27%28.%7C%5C%5C.%29%27/&patternType=keyword&sm=0)
    results for `'` in C++ (some of these are in comments -- a search
    limitation). By contrast, looking at something like the `%` operator, we see
    [5.3 million](https://sourcegraph.com/search?q=context:global+lang:c%2B%2B+count:10000000+/+%25+/&patternType=keyword&sm=0).
    While not as frequent as some C++ syntax, it is still fairly common.

> -   **Migrating C++ developers to Carbon:** The frequency of use can be expected

Reviewer 2: IMO this point and the previous point should be merged into one. I believe you are only mentioning "char literals are common in C++" _because_ you want to make the argument about knowledge transfer.

To drive home the point: Undefined behaviour is common in C++, but that's not a reason to make it common in Carbon too. 😅 So "common in C++" is not in itself a reason for Carbon to adopt something.

Author: Rephrased as background.

Note, I believe Carbon is considering what common undefined behaviors are in C++, and (often) doing similar -- just defining them. But that's all I'll say because it's off-topic.

    to have trained developers to expect single quotes to be used for
    characters, especially the C++ developers that Carbon is targeting.
    Repurposing them would create a friction for C++ developers to need to
    understand the different meanings of the same syntax in each of C++ and
    Carbon, something Carbon prefers to avoid.

> -   **Increased runtime error risks:** Runtime errors could take the form of

Reviewer 2: This risk seems a bit hypothetical. I think what you're trying to argue is ultimately: "_If_ we used double-quoted text for both `str` and `char`, that carries a small design risk, because no other statically typed language has done this, so we'd need to see how well it works out in practice".

I suppose that's a fair point, although basically every feature of Carbon carries design risk, so I don't find this point very compelling. I suppose it's a minor time saving. That is your call, not mine.

Author: I think the more specific type of issue is something leads may not think about, but it can probably be expected that if developers are choosing between `"x" as char` and `"x"[0]`, some will choose to save typing 5 characters.

It's very rare in C++, but [hyrum's law](https://www.hyrumslaw.com/) [applies](https://sourcegraph.com/search?q=context:global+lang:c%2B%2B+count:10000+/%22%5C%5B0%5C%5D%3B/&patternType=keyword&sm=0), and that's when there's currently a better character literal syntax to use.

    simple increased overhead, such as converting a string literal to a `str`
    then to a `char`. However, they could also be more insidious, such as doing
    `[0]` on a string literal and not validating that the string is exactly one
    character (this would also likely return a null byte for `""[0]`). By having
    a character literal type, Carbon encourages developers to stay within guide
    rails that make it easier to get compile-time behavior and program
    validation.

> -   **Block string literal use:** We also already have another use for single

Reviewer 2: I don't think this point is valid. Saving the `'` character for a future purpose doesn't force us to abandon the `'''` symbol. After all, Carbon already has both `'` and `'''` and it all works fine.

Author: Yes, it doesn't strictly force it, but I think it's worth inclusion due to the syntax overlap. Rephrased to add more detail.

not be convertible to `TextLiteral`). As a consequence, this code is invalid,
even though the same code would be valid if there were not `TextLiteral` type.

Advantages:

-   Avoids an explicit cast.

Disadvantages:

-   Shares most of the disadvantages of the primary explicit conversion
    approach.
    -   This includes the risk that developers will write `"..."[0]` instead of
        `"..." as char` when they need a character, although the frequency may
        be reduced.
-   Having additional types in common literals could lead to programmer errors
    in deducing generic types, as described above.
-   Implicit casts cause more operator ambiguity.
    -   How are operators that have different meanings for string and character
        literals handled, such as `Cpp.std.cout <<` or `<=>`?
    -   In Carbon, we'd probably still want string operators to work; for
        example, `"a" + "b" => "ab"`, and that can be compile-time. Is `"a" + 1`
        a pointer to the null byte as it is in C++ (similar to `&("a"[1])`), a
        character addition (`'a' + 1 => 'b'`), or does it require an explicit
        cast in order to ensure behavior is deliberate?

> ## Future work

Reviewer: super minor/optional: I might move this up to after `## Detail`? I missed it my first time through.

Author: Done
